SPECIAL ISSUE 

NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR 
LAW REPORTING 
LIBRARY 

Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 108 (National Assembly Bills No. 31) 

REPUBLIC OF KENYA 

KENYA GAZETTE SUPPLEMENT 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY BILLS, 2024 

NAIROBI, 17th May, 2024 

CONTENT 

Bill for Introduction into the National Assembly— 

The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024  	

PAGE 

685 

NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR 
LAW REPORTING 

'PA 	0 6 JUN 2024 

LIBRARY ARCHIVE 

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NAIROBI 

 
 
Short title. 

Amendment of 
section 2 of Cap. 
408. 

685 

THE KENYA ROADS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 

A Bill for 

AN ACT of Parliament to amend the Kenya Roads Act 

and for connected purposes 
ENACTED by the Parliament of Kenya, as follows- 
1.  This Act may be cited as the Kenya Roads 

(Amendment) Act 2024. 

2.  The Kenya Roads Act, (herein after referred to as 
"the principal Act") is amended in section 2 by inserting 
the following new definitions in their proper alphabetical 
sequence— 

"bicycle" has the same meaning assigned to it under 

the Traffic Act; 

"cycling lane" means on-toad lanes exclusively 
reserved for use by bicycles and wheelchairs, with clear 
markings separating them from other lanes used by 
motorized vehicles; 

"cycling track" means part of the road exclusively 
reserved for use by bicycles and wheelchairs and is 
physically separated from tracks used by motorized 
vehicles; 

"non-motorized transport" means all forms of travel 
that do not rely on an engine or motor for movement and 
includes walking, cycling and mobility assistance devices; 

"non-motorized vehicle" means any vehicle that is not 
self-propelled and includes bicycle, wheelchair, and 
scooter; 

"pedestrian" means a person travelling on foot; 

"pedestrian walkway" means that part of the road 
exclusively reserved for use by pedestrians and is 
physically separated from lanes used by motorized 
vehicles. 

3. Section 4 of the principal Act is amended in 
subsection (2) by inserting the following new paragraph 
immediately after paragraph (a)— 

Amendment of 
section 4 of Cap. 
408. 

686 	 The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 

(aa) designing and constructing designated tracks for 
non-motorized transport for existing roads and 
new roads under its control, including cycling 
lanes and pedestrian walkways which shall be 
separated from tracks for motorized transport. 

4. Section 7 of the principal Act is amended in — 

(1) subsection (2) by inserting the following new 

paragraph immediately after paragraph (a)— 

Amendment of 
section 7 of Cap. 
408. 

(aa) designing and constructing designated tracks for 
non-motorized transport for existing roads and 
new roads under its control, including cycling 
lanes and pedestrian walkways which shall be 
separated from tracks for motorized transport. 

5 Section 10 of the principal Act is amended in — 

(1) subsection (2) by inserting the following new 

paragraph immediately after paragraph (a)— 

(aa) designing and constructing designated tracks for 
non-motorized transport for existing roads and 
new roads under its control, including cycling 
lanes and pedestrian walkways which shall be 
separated from tracks for motorized transport. 

Amendment of 
section 10 of Cap. 
408. 

The principal Act is amended by inserting a new 

section immediately after Section 11 — 
Functions of county 	11A The county governments shall 
governments. 

have the following roles — 

Inserting a new 
section 10A. 

(1) designing 	and 	constructing 
designated tracks for non-motorized 
transport for existing roads and new roads 
under its control, including cycling lanes 
and pedestrian walkways which shall be 
separated from tracks for motorized 
transport. 

6. Section 22 of the principal Act is amended— 

(1) in subsection (1) by inserting the following new 

paragraph immediately after paragraph (a)— 

Amendment of 
section 22 of Cap. 
408. 

(aa) to co-operate with county governments which 
have power over non-motorized transport 
infrastructure on designated roads ; 

The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 	 687 

in subsection 2 paragraph (a) by inserting the- words 
"cycling lane, pedestrian walkway" immediately after the 
word "road" 

7. The principal Act is amended by inserting the 

following new section immediately after section 46- 

Amendment of 
section 46 of Cap. 
408. 

Regulations 

46A. The Cabinet 'Secretary may make 
regulations for design and construction of lanes 
for non-motorized transport relating to— 

Inserting a new 
section 46A. 

(a) use, safety or maintenance of the 
lanes for non-motorized transport; 

(b) 

(c). 

uniformity of design and standards 
of the. lanes for non-motorized 
transport; 

the roads in which the lanes for 
non-triotorized transport shall be 
constructed; and 

(d) the level and the width of the lanes 
for non-motorized transport 

8. The principal Act is amended in Section 50 by  Amendment ot 

inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph 408 Section 50 of Cap 
(2)— 

(1) The traffic police shall have the responsibility of 

enforcing these rules by ensuring — 

(a)  strict use of the dedicated lanes for pedestrians and 

cyclists; and 

(b)  the safety of non-motorized of non-motorized 

transport users. 

9. The enactment of these amendments shall take 
effect in 15 year's time to cater for already existing 
Infrastructure. 

Transitional 
Clause. 

688 	 The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 

MEMORANDUM OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Statement of object and reasons 

The Principal Object of the Bill is to amend the Kenya Roads 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023 to make provision for design and construction of 
lanes for non-motorized transport. 

Clause 1 of the Bill is the short title. 

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 of the Act to provide 
for the definition of the new terms introduced by the proposed 
amendments. 

Clause 3  of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 of the Act to make 
provision for the Kenya National Highways Authority to design and 
construct lanes for non-motorized transport in designated roads under its 
control. 

Clause 4  of the Bill seeks to amend section 7 of the Act to make 
provision for the Kenya Rural Roads Authority to design and construct 
lanes for non-motorized transport in designated roads under its control. 

Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 10 of the Act to make 
provision for the Kenya Urban Roads Authority to design and construct 
lanes for non-motorized transport in designated roads under its control. 
Further to make provision for county governments in the implementation 
of non-motorized transport infrastructure provision, such as sidewalks, 
pedestrian crossings and cycle lanes, as part of its responsibilities 

Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 22 of the Act to empower 
the road agencies to design and construct lanes for non-motorized 
transport. 

Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 46 of the Act to empower 
the Cabinet Secretary make regulations relating to design and construction 
of lanes for non-motorized transport. 

Clause 8  of the Bill seeks to amend Section 50 of the Act to 
introduce police enforcement powers on non-motorized transport 
infrastructure use, such as dedicated lanes for pedestrians and cyclists & 
ensuring the safety of non-motorized transport users. 

Statement on the delegation of legislative powers and limitation of 
fundamental rights and freedoms 

The Bill confers on the Cabinet Secretary the powers to make 

Regulations. It does not limit any fundamental rights or freedoms. 

The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 	 689 

Statement on how the Bill concerns county governments 

The Bill concerns county governments in terms of Article 110 (1) (a) 
of the Constitution as it affects the functions and powers of county 
governments as set out in Paragraph 5 (a) of Part 2 of the Fourth schedule 
of the Constitution. 

Statement of the Bill as a money Bill within the meaning of Article 114 
of the Constitution 

The Bill is Money Bill within Article 114 of the Constitution. 

Dated the 24th April, 2024. 

NAISULA LESUUDA, 

Member of Parliament . 

690 	 The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 

Sections which it is proposed to be Amended— 

Section 2 which is proposed to be amended— 

In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires — 

"Authority"  means the Highways Authority, the Rural Roads 

Authority or the Urban Roads Authority; 

"city"  shall have the meaning assigned to it under the Local 

Government Act (Cap. 265); 

"class" in relation to a road means the categorization assigned to it 

pursuant to the First Schedule; 

"construction"  means supervision, inspection and building and 

includes locating, surveying, mapping and eliminating road hazards; 

"Director-General"  means the Director-General appointed under 

section 13(1) or a person authorised to act on his behalf; 

"Highways Authority"  means the Kenya National Highways 

Authority established under section 3; 

"Local Authorities Transfer Fund"  shall have the meaning 
assigned to it under the Local Authorities Transfer Fund Act, 1998 (No. 8 
of 1998); 

"Minister"  means the Minister responsible for Roads; 

"municipality" shall have the meaning assigned to it under the Local 

Government Act (Cap. 265); 
"national roads"  means national roads as classified in the First 

Schedule; 

"road" means a public road as defined under the Public Roads and 

Roads of Access. Act (Cap. 399); 

"Road Fund" means the Kenya Roads Board Fund established under 

the Kenya Roads Board Act, 1999 (No. 7 of 1999); 

"roadside development" means a physical structure or facility on 

land within or adjoining a road reserve; 

"rural roads"  means rural roads as so classified in the First 

Schedule; 

"Rural Roads Authority" means the Kenya Rural Roads Authority 

established under section 6; 

The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 	 691 

"traffic sign" shall have the meaning assigned to it under the Traffic 

Act (Cap. 403); 

"urban roads"  means urban roads as so classified in the First 
Schedule;  "Urban Roads Authority"  means the Kenya Urban Roads 
Authority 

established under section  9;"vehicle"  shall have the meaning 

assigned to it in the Traffic Act. 

Section 4 which is proposed to be Amended—

Functions of=the Authority 

(1)  The Highways Authority shall be responsible for the 
management, development, rehabilitation and maintenance of national 
roads. 

(2)  For the purposes of discharging its responsibility under subsection 
(1), the. Highways Authority shall have the following functions and 
duties— 

(a)  constructing, upgrading, rehabilitating and maintaining roads 

under its control; 

(b)  controlling national roads and road reserves and access to 

roadside developments; 

(c)  implementing road policies in relation to national roads; 

(d)   

ensuring adherence to the rules and guidelines on axle load 
control prescribed under the Traffic Act (Cap. 403) and under 
any regulations under this Act; 

(e)   

ensuring that the quality of road works is in accordance with 
such standards as may be prescribed by the Minister; 

in collaboration with the Ministry responsible for Transport and 
the Police Department, overseeing the management of traffic 
and road safety on national roads; 

collecting and collating all such data related to the use of 
national roads as may be necessary for efficient forward 
planning under this Act; 

(h)   

(i)   

a) 

monitoring and evaluating the use of national roads; 

planning the development and maintenance of national roads; 

advising the Minister on all issues relating to national roads; 

692 	 The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 

(k) preparing the road works programmes for all national roads; 

(1) liaising and co-ordinating with other road authorities in planning 

and on operations in respect of roads; and 

(m) performing such other functions related to the implementation of 

this Act as may be directed by the Minister. 

Section 4 which is proposed to be Amended-

7. Functions of the Authority 

(1)  The Rural Roads Authority shall have responsibility for the 

management, development, rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads. 

(2)  For the purpose of discharging the responsibility described in 
subsection (1) above the Rural Roads Authority shall have the following 
functions and duties — 

(a)  constructing, upgrading, rehabilitating and maintaining roads 

under its control; 

(b)  controlling reserves for rural roads and access to roadside 

developments; 

(c)  implementing road policies in relation to rural roads; 

(d)  ensuring adherence by motorists to the rules and guidelines on 
axle load control prescribed under the Traffic Act (Cap. 403) or 
any regulations under this Act; 

(e)  ensuring that the quality of road works is in accordance with 

such standards as may be defined by the Minister; 

(f)  in collaboration with the Ministry responsible for Transport and 
the Police Department, overseeing the management of traffic on 
rural roads and issues related to road safety; 

(g)  collecting and collating all such data related to the use of rural 
roads as may be necessary for efficient forward planning under 
this Act; 

(h)  monitoring and evaluating the use of rural roads; 

(i)  planning the development and maintenance of rural roads; 

(j)  liaising and co-ordinating with other authorities in planning and 

operations in respect of roads; 

(k)  preparing the road work programmes for all rural roads; 

(1) advising the Minister on all issues relating to rural roads; and 

The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 	 693 

(m) performing such other functions related to the implementation of 

this Act as may be directed by the Minister. 

Section 10 which is proposed to be amended—

Functions of the Authority 

(1)  The Urban Roads Authority shall have the responsibility for the 
management, development, rehabilitation and maintenance of all public 
roads in the cities and municipalities in Kenya except where those roads 
are national roads. 

(2)  For the purposes of discharging its responsibility under subsection 

(1) the Authority shall have the following powers and duties — 

(a)  constructing, upgrading, rehabilitating and maintaining roads 

under its control; 

(b)  controlling urban road reserves and access to roadside 

developments; 

(c)  implementing roads policies in relation to urban roads; 

(d)  ensuring adherence by motorists to the rules and guidelines on 
axle load control prescribed under the Traffic Act (Cap. 403) 
and under any regulations under this Act; 

(e)  ensuring that the quality of road works is in accordance with 

such standards as may be defined by the Minister; 

(f)  in collaboration with the Ministry responsible for transport and 
the Police Department, overseeing the management of traffic 
and road safety on urban roads; 

(g)  monitoring and evaluating the use of urban roads; 
(h)  planning the development and maintenance of urban roads; 
(i)  collecting and collating all such data related to the use of urban 
roads as may be necessary for efficient forward planning under 
this Act; 

(j)  preparing the road works programmes for all urban roads; 
(k)  liaising and co-ordinating with other road authorities in planning 

and on operations in respect of roads; 

(1) advising the Minister on all issues relating to urban roads; and 

(m) performing such other functions relatk to the implementation of 

this Act as may be directed by the Minister. 

694 	 The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 

Section 22 which is proposed to be amended—

Powers of the Authority as a statutory body 

(1) An Authority shall have power — 

(a)  to maintain, operate, improve and manage the roads under its 

jurisdiction; 

(b)  to construct new roads; 

(c)  to measure and assess the weights, dimensions and capacities of 
vehicles using any road and provide measures to ensure 
compliance with rules relating to axle load control, other 
provisions of the Traffic Act (Cap. 403) and any regulations 
under this Act; and 

(d)  to provide such amenities or facilities for persons making use of 
the services or facilities provided by the Authority as may appear 
to the Authority necessary or desirable. 

(2) Subject to this Act, the powers conferred by, subsection (1) shall 
include all such powers as are necessary or appropriate and proper for the 
purposes of the Authority and in particular, but without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing, shall include powers— 

(a)  to construct any road, bridge, building, drainage structure, drain, 
river channelling or any other necessary or desirable works 
required for the purposes of the Authority; 

(b)  to operate machinery and equipment on public roads in such 

manner as it deems necessary; 

(c)  to carry on any business necessary or desirable to be carried on 
for the purposes of the Authority and to act as an agent for the 
Government in the provision of any agreed services; 

(d)  with the approval of the Minister, to determine, impose and levy 
rates, tolls, charges, dues or fees for any of its services or for the 
use by any person of its facilities; 

(e)  to prohibit, control or regulate; 

i.  the use by any person of the services performed, or the 

facilities provided, by the Authority; or 

ii.  the usage of any vehicle on any road or on any premises 

occupied by the Authority; 

The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 	 695 

(f) to sell, let or otherwise dispose of any property, movable or 
immovable, which in the opinion of the Board, is not necessary 
for the purposes of the Authority; 

Provided that an Authority shall not so sell, let or otherwise 
dispose of any building or land placed at its disposal by the 
Government otherwise than with the consent of, and under 
conditions agreed by, the Minister; 

(g) to act as an agent for any person engaged, whether within Kenya 
or elsewhere, in the performance of services, or the provision of 
facilities, of a kind similar or complementary to those performed 
or provided by,  the Authority; 

(h) to enter into agreements with any person; 

i.  for the supply, construction, manufacture, maintenance or 
repair by that person of any property, movable or immovable, 
necessary or desirable for the purposes of the Authority; 

ii.  for the performance or provision by that person of any of the 
services or the facilities which may be performed or provided 
by the Authority; 

iii.  for the payment, collection or apportionment of any tolls, 
rates, charges or other receipts arising out of the performance 
or the provision by that person of any such services or 
facilities; 

(i) to establish or acquire any subsidiary corporation with the written 
approval of the Minister and the Minister responsible for Finance; 
or 

(j) to enter into any arrangement with any state corporation or other 
entity which, in the opinion of the Board, is likely to promote or 
secure the provision, or improved provision, of any service or 
facilities which they may separately provide. 

(3)  For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that subsections 
(1) and (2) relate only to the capacity of the Authority as a statutory body 
and nothing in those provisions shall be construed as authorizing the 
disregard by the Authority of any law. 

(4)  The powers conferred on an Authority under this section to 
construct or improve any road shall empower the Authority to undertake 
the construction or execution of any works necessary thereto on land 
vested in the Authority or on land placed at its disposal by the 
Government, or, in the case of land not so vested in, or placed at the 

696 	 The Kenya Roads (Amendment) Bill, 2024 

disposal of, the Authority, only with the agreement of the owner of the 
land on which such works are to be constructed or executed. 

(5) Where any land is required by an Authority for the purposes of its 
functions under this Act the Authority shall proceed in accordance with 
section 22. 

Section 46 which is proposed to be amended—

Making of regulations by Authorities 

(1)  An Authority may with the approval of the Minister make 

regulations for the better performance of its functions under this Act. 

(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), an 

Authority may make regulations — 

a.  relating to the use, safety or maintenance of the roads falling 

within its responsibility; 

b.  relating to the erection of structures on, near, over or under the 

roads falling within its responsibility; 

c.  for the drainage of streets, lands, compounds and buildings 

adjacent to the road; 

d.  respecting the level, width and construction of roads and streets; 

e.  for the removal, demolition or alteration of any projection, 
structure or thing obstructing a road or likely to cause damage or 
inconvenience to road users; and 

f.  prescribing the fees payable for services provided by the 

Authority. 

(3) Rules or regulations made under subsection (1) may prescribe, in 
respect of any contravention of any provision thereof, a fine not exceeding 
one hundred thousand shillings or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
one year or both, and may also prescribe, in the case of continuing 
offences, an additional penalty in respect of each day in which the offence 
continues. 

(4) The provisions of section 34 of the Interpretation and General 
Provisions Act (Cap. 2) shall not apply to regulations made under this Act. 

